JUDY WOODRUFF, PBS NEWSHOUR
ANCHOR: Good evening. I m Judy
Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN, PBS NEWSHOUR
ANCHOR: And I m Hari
Sreenivasan.
WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight, a new dynamic on the
campaign trail:
SREENIVASAN: Also ahead this
Thursday, no more e-cigarettes
for minors. The FDA announces
new age requirements in a
crackdown on unregulated
tobacco, while California raises
the legal
age for smoking to 21.
WOODRUFF: And, planning a
vacation? How airlines are
battling over bargain passenger
fairs
for trips to the Caribbean.
(BEIGN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: The airlines
are afraid that if customers are
given the choice, they'll
buy their tickets somewhere else
from someone who will offer them
a better deal. The last
I heard, that was capitalism.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
SREENIVASAN: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour".
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: Republican Donald
Trump gets back to campaigning
tonight, now that he's virtually
wrapped up the GOP nomination
for president. But as he works
to win over voters, he faces
new resistance from leaders in
his own party. The latest
example came today from Paul
Ryan,
speaker of the House
of Representatives.
We begin our coverage with John
Yang, who's covering tonight's
Trump event in West Virginia.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
JOHN YANG, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT: For Donald Trump,
tonight's event in Charleston
isn't about next week's primary,
it s all about winning the fall
campaign.
MARK KEYSER: He come out, he won
Indiana, secured the nomination
and one of the first
things that come out of his
mouth was we're going to help
people in West Virginia, we're
going to help people in
Pennsylvania, we're going to get
coal back on the market.
YANG: And in today's "New York
Times," Trump outlined goals for
his first 100 days in office.
They include: designing the wall
he says he'll build on the
Mexican border, stopping Muslim
immigration, auditing the
Federal Reserve, and repealing
the Affordable Care Act.
He also went on CNBC, making
his economic pitch to voters.
DONALD TRUMP (R), PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATE: They have two jobs in
some cases, and they're
making less money than they made
20 years ago. And that's why
you're wondering what's
going on and why they're not
liking Republicans or Democrats.
I mean, they're not liking
either,
to be honest with you.
YANG: But there's was new
evidence that Trump has a long
way to go to rally his own party
behind him. House Speaker Paul
Ryan said today, he s not ready
to back Trump, and there
was more. "Politico" obtained a
recording of Republican Senator
John McCain speaking
at a recent fundraiser.
SEN. JOHN MCCAIN (R), ARIZONA:
If Donald Trump is at the top of
the ticket, here in Arizona,
with over 30 percent of the vote
being the Hispanic vote, no
doubt that this may be the
race of my life.
YANG: Nevertheless, top Trump
aides have begun the behind the
scenes overtures to party
leaders.
They've already had some
success. A number of Republican
members of Congress, are signing
up to lend their support.
Meanwhile, the Democrats are
still battling. Bernie Sanders
is in West Virginia, too.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (I-VT),
DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATE: It's about time we
started in the
wealthiest nation in the
world to talk about poverty.
(CHEERS)
YANG: Still dogging Hillary
Clinton despite her big lead in
delegates.
Clinton already has Trump
squarely in her sights.
HILLARY CLINTON (D),
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: I think
that anybody running for office
should
spend as much or more time
listening than talking and I
know I will be way ahead in
that category against Donald
Trump, there s no doubt about
that.
YANG: She spent today
campaigning and fundraising in
California.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
YANG: People have been waiting
for hours in the cold rain in
Charleston, waiting for Donald
Trump to do what he says working
on Hillary Clinton, the
beginning of a general election
campaign. A lot of the people
online say they re excited to
see Trump as the nominee for the
very first time -- Judy.
WOODRUFF: So, John, do you sense
there is something different in
how they see him now
that he's the
presumptive nominee?
YANG: I think there is
excitement that he's now the
guy, he has now cleared the way
to
the nomination and that he ll
start to take on Hillary
Clinton. A lot of the people we
talked to said they were
very excited to see that.
A lot of talk here about West
Virginia. They hope he can help
West Virginia's economy,
particularly the coal workers we
talked to, who were -- expressed
some anger at what they
heard from Hillary Clinton
lately about putting coal
workers out of work, Judy.
WOODRUFF: And, John, what have
you learned about how Donald
Trump may be shaping a different
kind of campaign going into the
general election against
Secretary Clinton, assuming it
is
Secretary Clinton?
YANG: Well, that's the big
question, Judy. These campaign
-- this campaign has been unlike
anything we've ever seen before.
Not much television ads. A lot
of social media. A lot
of free media.
Television interviews.
He only has one event a day,
usually late in the day like
this one because he's going
home every night, commuting to
New York and flying out again
the next day. The big question
is whether this will change in
the general election, although
some may say you don t
tinker with success -- Judy.
WOODRUFF: And, finally, John, we
know that Hillary Clinton's
opponent Bernie Sanders
is also in West Virginia today.
Any read on the kind of
reception he's getting there?
YANG: He s a pretty strong lead
in the polls, about 8-point lead
in the last pre-primary
poll. And what's fueling his
campaign are a lot of the same
issues and the same forces
and the same demographics that
is giving Trump a lot of
strength here. This is a state
of
poor white voters, a lot of whom
are hurting very much from the
economy, a lot of people
hurting from the downturn in the
coal industry, a lot of those
things giving fuel to Sanders'
campaign and it's also likely to
help him at some of the other
states down the road
like Kentucky, right down until
that big showdown in California.
So, he's going to be dogging
Hillary Clinton every step of
the way right to the end --
Judy.
WOODRUFF: John Yang reporting
for us from what will be a Trump
campaign event in Charleston,
West Virginia -- we thank you.
YANG: Thanks, Judy.
WOODRUFF: We'll take a closer
look at how Republicans are
dividing over Donald Trump
as their nominee a little
later in the program.
SREENIVASAN: In the day's other
news, a raging wildfire forced
new evacuations in the heart
of Canada's oil sands country.
Wind-driven flames had already
put more than 80,000 people
to flight, from Fort McMurray in
Alberta. There were more towns
to the south that were
evacuated as the fire swept
across tinder-dry woodlands.
Paul Davies of Independent
Television News has this report.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
PAUL DAVIES, INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS: They are
driving away from homes they
have
abandoned to the flames. The
fire so close, it's showering
sparks from trees it's consuming
alongside the road. And caught
in this vision of Armageddon,
thousands of families running
for their lives.
How long it will be before Fort
McMurray will welcome people
again, no one can know.
The city had laid on a fleet of
buses to help the less
advantaged escape from the
inevitable
destruction, but there were
strict limits on what
possessions could be taken. For
many,
it was the clothes they could
carry and their pets but no
more.
DONNA GOALLAMOT, EVACUEE: You
don't know what's burned and
what s not burned, when you can
go back. Now you're sitting here
and all you see is red flames.
It's pretty scary.
DAVIES: The evacuation so far
prevented loss of life but in
the suburbs where the flames
have done their worse and moved
on, there is little left for
people to return to.
Two thousand buildings have been
destroyed and tonight there are
fears large portions
of the city may be lost before
any improvement in weather
conditions.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
SREENIVASAN: The fire has also
shut down about one-third of
Canada's total crude oil
capacity.
WOODRUFF: A near- miracle today
in Nairobi, Kenya. Four more
people were rescued after
being trapped for six days in
the rubble of a collapsed
building. The first was a woman
who was eight months pregnant
and was taken to a nearby
hospital for treatment.
Officials
said her unborn baby did not
survive. The death toll from
Friday's collapse now stands
at 36, with dozens
still missing.
SREENIVASAN: In Syria, an air
strike killed at least 28 people
in a crowded refugee camp,
including children. It happened
at the northwestern town of
Sarmada, in a rebel-held area
near
the Turkish border. Video posted
on social media showed tents
burned to the ground, amid
clouds of dark smoke. The camp
is home to around 2,000 people.
It was unclear whose
planes carried out the strike,
but U.S. officials denied any
role.
WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, the prime
minister of Turkey announced
today he's resigning, moving
the NATO nation ever closer to
authoritarian rule. Ahmet
Davutoglu had held his office
since 2014, but he was at odds
with President Recep Tayyip
Erdogan, who's pushing for
greater
power for himself. Even so, the
prime minister pledged continued
support for Erdogan, despite
his crackdown on dissent.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
AHMET DAVUTOGLU, PRIME MINISTER,
TURKEY (translated): My loyalty
to our president will continue
until the last breath I will
breathe. Nobody has or will hear
a single word against our
president from my mouth.
Everybody should know that and I
would never let people exploit
this matter.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: The resignation comes
as Europe is relying on Turkey
to cut off the flow of
migrants, and the U.S. needs its
help fighting the Islamic state
group.
SREENIVASAN: Back in this
country, the number of sexual
assaults reported in the
military
stayed about the same last year,
but Pentagon officials say it's
still far too high. In
all, there were 6,083 reports of
assaults in 2015, virtually
unchanged from 2014. At
the same time, more than 16,000
service members intervened in
situations they believed could
escalate to sexual assault.
WOODRUFF: President Obama has
commuted prison sentences for 58
more federal convicts. It's
part of his recent push to
overhaul the criminal justice
system, with a focus on
non-violent
drug offenders. Most of this
latest group will be freed in
September. 18 had been serving
life sentences.
SREENIVASAN: Wall Street
struggled to find much direction
today. The Dow Jones Industrial
Average gained nine points to
close at 17,660, the NASDAQ fell
eight points, and the S&P
500 dropped a
fraction of a point.
WOODRUFF: And, a game that dates
back to 1978 leads the new class
of inductees into the
Video Game Hall of Fame. "Space
Invaders" set off a craze for
arcade games in the '70s
and '80s. Also inducted today:
the educational adventure game
"Oregon Trail," as well as
"Sonic The Hedgehog," "The
Sims," "The Legend of Zelda,"
and "Grand Theft Auto 3", which
has been criticized for
violence and sexual content.
The Video Game Hall of Fame
is in Rochester, New York.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
banning the sale of e-cigarettes
to minors, conservatives
for and against the presumptive
Republican nominee, the rise of
discount airlines in
the U.S., and much more.
(MUSIC)
SREENIVASAN: There'll be no more
e-cigarette and cigar sales to
people under the age of
18. Federal oversight of the
growing industry was announced
today by the Food and Drug
Administration.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
SREENIVASAN: They've been around
since 2006, but until now, they
were largely un-regulated.
E-cigarettes turn nicotine into
an inhalable liquid vapor, but
without the tobacco in regular
cigarettes.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: With blue
e-cigs there's no tobacco only
vapor.
SREENIVASAN: Ads for the
products tout benefits, using
celebrity endorsements, like
this one
from actress Jenny McCarthy. In
fact, there's no scientific
consensus on benefits, or
potential
harm.
But Health and Human Services
Secretary Sylvia Burwell says
the industry will now be
regulated,
citing its rapid
growth among teens.
SYLVIA BURWELL, SECRETARY OF
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES:
Between 2011 and 2015, the
percentage
of high school students who
smoke e-cigarettes has
skyrocketed over 900 percent.
Meanwhile,
hookah usage has risen
significantly among young people
and cigar smoking continues to
be a problem among high
schoolers. Together, that means
millions of kids are being
introduced
to nicotine every year, a new
generation hooked on a highly
addictive chemical.
SREENIVASAN: Manufacturers, many
of them small companies, will
have to undergo a lengthy
federal review in order
to stay on the market.
In response, Gregory Conley,
president of the American Vaping
Association, said today,
quote, "If the FDA's rule is not
changed by Congress or the
courts, thousands of small
businesses will close
in two to three years."
House Republicans have their own
answer: a bill to curb
retroactive safety reviews for
e-cigarettes and cigars.
(TOBACCO FREE CALIFORNIA AD)
SREENIVASAN: Meanwhile, some
states have launched ad
campaigns against teenage use of
e-cigarettes.
And yesterday, California became
the second state in the nation,
after Hawaii, to raise
the smoking age to 21.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
SREENIVASAN: The use of
e-cigarettes among youth keeps
rising. The latest estimates
from
the CDC show about 2.5 million
high school students or middle
schoolers vaped at least
once a month.
Mitch Zeller is the FDA's point
person on today's decision. He's
the director of its
Center for Tobacco
Products. And he joins us.
What's the exact health risk
you're trying to prevent?
MITCH ZELLER, FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION: No child, no
teenager should be exposed to
nicotine. Nicotine is addictive.
E-cigarettes have nicotine in
them. Kids should not be
inhaling those products
into their lungs.
There is a separate debate about
whether e-cigarettes have a
public health benefit to some
current
cigarette smokers who might be
able to use the product to
transition away from harmful
cigarettes, but there should be
no harm reduction questions
about kids. Kids should not be
using
e-cigarettes and today's action
will take this product out of
the Wild Wild West of
unregulation into the
world of being regulated.
SREENIVASAN: But are you
concerned it could have a
chilling effect on the people
trying
to transition away from
conventional cigarettes using
this as a way to step down?
ZELLER: FDA is a public health
protection and consumer agency
and we will make policy
where the science takes us. The
fact is that 70 percent of all
adult e-cigarettes consumers
today are still smoking
cigarettes together with their
e-cigarettes. So, we don't know
if they're transitioning away
from e-cigarettes or if along
the way, 70 percent of all adult
e-cigarette users are still
smoking cigarettes, they're
losing interest in quitting
conventional
cigarettes.
SREENIVASAN: So, how do we
measure all this, where's the
science behind exactly what s
happening, how the
behaviors are changing?
ZELLER: FDA is making a massive
investment in what we call the
regulatory science to
get answers to two fundamental
questions -- who is using
products like e-cigarettes and
how
are they being used? We are
following 46,000 children and
adults to get answers to
questions
which products are you using,
why are you using them, and how
our patterns of use changing?
SREENIVASAN: So, the industry is
also pushing back as expected.
And saying, look, the fees
and the process and structure
you have for the applications is
going to essentially close
down some of those small
businesses and small
manufacturers and it s
essentially going
to protect the big tobacco
companies that have shifted and
you really will be giving
them an advantage
over the long haul.
ZELLER: This is a public health
issue. Beyond e-cigarettes we're
talking about the need
to regulate cigars. Every single
day, more teenage boys light up
a cigar for the first
time than light up a regular
cigarette. So, between cigars
and e-cigarettes, we have a
lot of work to do to protect
kids from the harms of tobacco
products.
There are costs that are
associated with becoming
regulated. We have tried to
address the concerns
of small businesses. And I
disagree with the assessment
that this is an industry that's
going out of business. They may
have to transition away from the
conventional model that we see
in a typical vape shop, but
there is time to submit the
applications, time for us to
conduct our reviews and
we ll take it as it goes.
SREENIVASAN: Some of the health
advocates are saying, listen,
there is almost too much
time involved, there s up to
three years and some of these
folks can continue to sell
their wares that they are
selling today, knowing that at
that point is when they have to
sunset
their business.
ZELLER: And that s what we ve
done today is reasonable and
sensible regulation. We
received over 135,000 comments
as part of our rule making
process. And on the issue
of flavors in e-cigarettes, we
got comments across the board,
from public health groups
that said flavors should be
band, to users of e-cigarette
who said, anecdotally, that's
what got me off cigarettes.
So, we think we've struck the
right middle of the road here.
The key point here is that
what FDA has done today is
foundational. Finally,
e-cigarettes, cigars and hookah
will be regulated
by the Food and Drug
Administration.
SREENIVASAN: If you know what
attracts the young kids is the
flavors, why not have something
that addresses the
flavors today?
ZELLER: We will be able to
address the rule of flavors in
each and every one of the
applications
that the companies submitted for
marketing authorization, and
they will have to answer
our questions about what role
are the flavors in your products
playing in initiation by
kids and initiation by anyone
who's never used the product?
We'll be able to handle
that through the applications.
SREENIVASAN: There is also
concern there is a grandfather
date going back to 2007. It s
essentially saying we're going
to start the rule making back
then. Well, are you maybe
protecting devices that were
more dangerous and didn't have
to comply with the rules that
you're imposing today?
ZELLER: The grandfather date is
a legislative and legal issue,
and what we said is that,
as a regulatory agency, we can't
change the date by which certain
products would receive
grandfather status and be
exempt from pre-market review.
What some in industry are trying
to do is advance the grandfather
date in a way that
we think and the administration
thinks will be harmful to public
health by forever exempting
all currently marketed
e-cigarettes and cigars from a
pre-market review by the Food
and Drug
Administration. We think that
would be bad for health.
SREENIVASAN: If Congress can
change the date in one
direction, they can change it in
the
other. What happens to the
entire force of the law if that
grandfather date is moved
to, say, 2016?
ZELLER: If that legislation
passes, we think that public
health will be harmed because
one of the most important
responsibilities that Congress
gave FDA was to apply public
health principles to determine
which products would be
authorized for marketing. If
they
received grandfather status and
we don't have the opportunity to
apply those public health
principles, we don't think
that's good for public health.
SREENIVASAN: Mitch Zeller from
the FDA -- thanks so much for
joining us.
ZELLER: Thank you.
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: Now, back to the
race for the White House.
As we reported, House Speaker
Paul Ryan today became the
highest ranking Republican yet
to say he's not ready to
support Donald Trump.
We examine the divisions the
Trump nomination is driving with
two conservatives on either
side of the split. We start with
a Trump supporter,
Representative Tom Marino who
joins us from
State College, Pennsylvania.
Congressman Marino, thank
you for joining us.
You endorsed Donald Trump as
early as just about anybody in
the House of Representatives
back in February. Why?
REP. TOM MARINO (R),
PENNSYLVANIA: Well, it's very
simple. I'll answer that with a
rhetorical
statement. How's it been knowing
the last 30 years having
governors, senators, and career
politicians being president,
we're $20 trillion in debt, 20
million people out of work,
businesses
are leaving the country in
droves, the borders are not
secured, people tell me in my
district
they're afraid they're not going
to be able to even send their
kids to school because
they don't know if they're going
to have a job or find a job.
So, Donald Trump has hired tens
of thousands of people. He's the
only candidate that has
signed the front of a paycheck.
I just was talking to him the
other day -- and you know what
one of his first meetings among
others is going to be? It s
going to be with businesspeople,
business women and men,
who can tell Donald what the
problem, is why they have to
leave this country.
So, I think it's a no-brainer.
WOODRUFF: Congressman, what do
you say to fellow Republicans
who say they don't believe
Donald Trump is really,
truly conservative?
MARINO: Well, you know, I m a
conservative. Donald is a --
he's an individual that touches
all Americans, Republicans,
Democrats and independents. He's
a populist. He's bringing
more and more people out to vote
that ever came out to vote in
the past.
He's going to have -- when the
primary is over, he's going to
have more votes from the
Republicans than any other
presidential primary candidate
in the history of this country.
He's built a $10 billion
business by surrounding him with
the best and the brightest, and
I
don't see what any of these
other people have to offer.
The American people are sick and
tired of being sick. They're
sick and tired of the
establishment, the career
politicians, the so-called
political bosses in Washington,
and, really, what we needed to
do was bulldoze Washington and
start over.
WOODRUFF: And, Congressman, the
other -- one of the other
criticisms one hears about Mr.
Trump is about his temperament.
There are some who say they
might be willing to support
him but worry as president he
doesn't have the temperament to
be leader of the free world.
MARINO: Well, if he didn't have
the temperament to be the
president, I don't think he
would
be as successful as he is in
business. I have been with him
many times, smoking with him
many times. He asked my
advice. I give it to him.
I don't say just exactly what
you might want to hear because
I m that kind of a person,
but just look in the past. What
has -- what does Hillary Clinton
have to offer? You know,
what do other candidates have to
offer as far as creating jobs?
He's known all over the world
and he's certainly going to let
the rest of the world know that
we don't think we're better than
anyone else, but we re not going
to be taken advantage
of anymore like we have been in
trade, like we have been in
foreign affairs concerning
Putin. He's going to take China
on. I think they know that he's
a serious guy and I believe
that he's going to make this
country great again with the
help of the American people.
WOODRUFF: And what do you say to
the leader in your own party in
the House of Representatives,
Speaker Paul Ryan, who said
today he's not ready to support
Donald Trump because he still
has work to do to
unify your party?
MARINO: Well, Paul is new at the
job. It's a big switch going
from the chairman over
to the speaker of the House
because there is no one in the
public's eye than the speaker
other than the president.
But I'm going to give Paul the
benefit of the doubt. We're back
in D.C. next week. We'll
have a discussion about that.
There it is a responsibility
there that he has to work
to bring the party together and
I know he and Donald have been
having discussions.
WOODRUFF: Representative Tom
Marino of Pennsylvania, we thank
you very much.
MARINO: It's always my pleasure.
WOODRUFF: And Donald Trump has
responded to Speaker Ryan this
evening. In his statement,
he said, quote, "I am not ready
to support Speaker Ryan's
agenda. Perhaps in the future
we can work together and come to
an agreement about what is best
for the American people.
They have been treated so badly
for so long that it's about time
for politicians to put
them first."
Now for a view from a
conservative critic of Donald
Trump, we turn to John
McCormack,
senior writer at "The
Weekly Standard" magazine.
John McCormack, welcome.
Why are you opposed to Mr.
Trump as the party's nominee?
JOHN MCCORMACK, THE WEEKLY
STANDARD: Well, you know, what
you heard Paul Ryan say today
is that we want a standard
bearer who bears our standards.
And you could view that from
one respect as a matter of
ideology, something that Paul
Ryan would say is that we're
going
to have a debt crisis if we
don't get entitlements under
control, Donald Trump is
completely
not a conservative on that
and many other issues.
But for me, really, the issue is
more of temperament and
character. I think that for the
past ten
months, Donald Trump has proven
to be nothing less than an
unstable conspiracy theorist
with an authoritarian streak.
You know, he has -- he got his
start in politics saying
Barack Obama's birth certificate
was fake. He suggests that
George W. Bush knowingly
lied that there are weren't
weapons of mass destruction in
Iraq. That s an unproven
conspiracy theory. Just this
week, he said that Ted Cruz's
father was involved in the
JFK assassination.
That s just sheer lunacy, and it
doesn t, it s not the kind of
stability that you
want in a commander-in-chief.
So, for me, I d be willing to
take a chance on Donald
Trump, if you just simply want
quite (ph) as conservatives I
like. But again, on matters
of character and temperament, I
just don't think he's there.
WOODRUFF: Well, you probably
heard, I talked with Congressman
Tom Marino of Pennsylvania,
who I asked him that temperament
question, and he said, well,
he's been a successful
businessman. He said his
temperament is what's helped him
get him where he is today. What
about that?
MCCORMACK: Well, if you look at
a lot of his business dealings,
you know, he's really just
insulted a lot of people, been
very aggressive. He's gotten
where he is more out of his fame
than business acumen. I mean,
just in his campaign, we've seen
him denigrate women,
he has insulted even prisoners
of war when he said of John
McCain, tat I like people
who weren't captured. I can't
believe a patriotic party has
chosen someone who has
denigrated
prisoners of war like that.
And until Donald Trump can prove
he's a man of character and a
man of temperament, which
he hasn t done, which I don't
think he can do, I can t support
him.
WOODRUFF: Are you saying you
don t think you could come
around -- you and others who
agree with you, couldn't come
around to support Donald Trump
if he demonstrates temperament
you say you look for in a
president changes and maybe
comes up with positions on
issues
that you can agree with?
MCCORMACK: Well, I think the
Donald Trump that we've seen
over the last ten months is
the real Donald Trump. I don't
see him, you know, apologizing
publicly to all the women
he's insulted -- degraded,
really -- to the prisoner of war
people like John McCain, to
excommunicate the nationalists
who have found a welcoming home
in his campaign, to prove
that he has a sober and steady
hands. You know, I mean, he
bounces all over the place
on tissues. He can't control his
worst impulses, as he insults
Heidi Cruz, he threatened to,
quote, "spill the beans" on her.
It s not the stability you re
seeing, and I think the person
you've seen in the
last ten months is the real
Donald Trump. So, I don't think
I'll be able to support
him in November. I hope there is
a third party candidate, maybe
somebody like Dr. Coburn
from Oklahoma. Time is running
out to get on the ballot, but I
hope there's a viable
option for principled
conservatives in November.
WOODRUFF: Well, that s what I
want to ask you, John McCormack.
What do you and other
conservatives do who aren't able
to support Donald Trump? If you
support a third party,
doesn't that automatically help
the Democratic nominee who's
likely to be Hillary Clinton?
MCCORMACK: Well, you know, the
polls show right now that
Hillary Clinton is going to
beat Donald Trump whether or not
conservative. It's very likely
she'll beat him whether or
not conservatives support Donald
Trump. A recent CNN poll found
84 percent of Republican
back Donald Trump. Hillary
Clinton was leading Trump
overall by 13 percentage points,
which
means if you have 100 percent of
Republicans supported Donald
Trump, he would still lose
to Hillary Clinton.
But, you know, at the end of the
day, conservatives, they just
kind of take a stand and say
that
they believe that both
candidates are disqualified. On
one hand, you see Hillary
Clinton, someone
who s Supreme Court nominee
would trample the Constitution,
send the country hurdling
to the left, and then Donald
Trump, who as I said, is simply
unfit to be commander-in-chief.
And you just have to take a
stand, let the chips fall where
they may. You can hope that
there is a third party
principled candidate there and
if not, write somebody in and
vote
down ballot.
WOODRUFF: I want to ask you
about another point that we
heard Congressman Marino make,
and that is, he said Trump
appeals -- he s a populist. He s
appealing to Democrats,
to independents, as well as
Republicans. Why wouldn't Donald
Trump be able to put together
a coalition that could
prevail in November?
JUDY WOODRUFF, PBS NEWSHOUR
ANCHOR: I want to ask you about
another point that we heard
Congressman Marino make, and
that is, he said Trump appeals
-- he s a populist. He s
appealing to Democrats, to
independents, as well as
Republicans. Why wouldn't Donald
Trump
be able to put together a
coalition that could prevail in
November?
JOHN MCCORMACK, THE WEEKLY
STANDARD: Well, it hasn't
happened so far. He has the
highest
unfavorable ratings of any
candidate in the modern era.
Roughly 65 percent of Americans
have an unfavorable view of him.
His net unfavorability rating is
minus 37 percent, Hillary
Clinton
is minus 17. So, she's not all
that unpopular but he's a lot
more unpopular than she is.
He would have to be a different
person in the next six months to
have people have a
different view of him. I m not
sure he's capable of that. I
highly doubt it.
WOODRUFF: So, just quickly, you
don't see the Republican Party
and conservatives coming
together between now and
November to support him?
MCCORMACK: I think a lot of
principled conservatives simply
won't be able to. I don't think
that
the fact he's now the
presumptive nominee doesn't
change the fact he's manifestly
unfit
to be president of the United
States and commander-in-chief,
and neither do I think Hillary
Clinton is
qualified to be
commander-in-chief, given what
her Supreme Court nominees would
do to
the Constitution and where
they would take this country.
WOODRUFF: John McCormack, senior
writer for "The Weekly Standard"
magazine -- thank you
very much.
MCCORMACK: Thank you.
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN, PBS NEWSHOUR
ANCHOR: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
9/11 victims making headway in
their fight to sue Saudi
Arabia, a retrospective of a
photographer's controversial
work, and a 91-year-old's take
on getting old.
But first, a fight brewing over
flights and lower cost trips to
some exotic locales.
Economics correspondent Paul
Solman suffered through this
tough assignment, part of his
weekly series, "Making Sense",
which airs Thursdays.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
PAUL SOLMAN, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT: France in the
Caribbean, the islands of
Guadeloupe.
Pretty much as paradisal as
their P.R. footage portrays
them: French; exotic; with more
than
a hint of spice. All just four
hours from New York and, if you
book early, for $69 or
less, November through April.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:
Flying to Guadeloupe?
SOLMAN: Because upstart
Norwegian Airlines, some call it
the Southwest Airlines of
Europe,
is now undercutting the few big
post-merger carriers and their
few foreign partners, which
among them control U.S.
skies for travel abroad.
Anders Lindstrom of Norwegian.
ANDERS LINDSTROM, NORWEGIAN AIR:
So the fare is not unique for a
European airline, it just
that really highlights how
overpriced the American aviation
market really is.
SOLMAN: Founded in 1993, the
low-cost airline is profitable,
due to several advantages:
high load factors; our plane was
90 percent full; brand-new
Boeings, the most fuel-efficient
planes on earth. But
mainly, says Lindstrom --
LINDSTROM: We don't have all the
decades of maintenance costs and
labor costs that the
airlines traditionally do. So,
we're starting with new
aircraft, new crew, which really
keeps fares low.
SOLMAN: And, of course, low
fares tend to mean full planes.
But in the end, says aviation
industry watcher
Michael E. Levine --
MICHAEL E. LEVINE, NEW YORK
UNIVERSITY: The main difference
is labor arrangements. They're
a new airline, their pilots have
low seniority, they have more
productive labor arrangements.
SOLMAN: Arrangements like not
using hubs and instead flying
non-stop point to point so
pilots and crew can live near
the airports they fly from. And
that's the Southwest model,
right?
One type of aircraft, all the
pilots qualified to fly it.
LINDSTROM: Yes, it's a
simplified version, and that's
something goes across all low
cost
airlines around the world.
SOLMAN: What seemed odd, though,
was that the big carriers, who
used to fly to Guadeloupe
in the '70s, haven't, for years,
save for a few American airlines
flights from Miami.
How come no American carrier
saw this as an opportunity?
JEROME SIOBUD, GUADELOUPE
AIRPORT: We think that they were
afraid not to fill their plane.
Norwegian took the risk and they
are now flying full planes.
SOLMAN: Jerome Siobud manages
Guadeloupe's airport. He says
that because this is legally
France, it's part of the
European Union, which in the
1980s voted to prohibit
countries from
offering monetary guarantees to
airlines, basically bidding for
their business. So,
U.S. carriers abruptly
stopped coming.
SIOBUD: You know that this is
part of the business and the
industry, as part of the
European community, we
can not do that, so --
SOLMAN: But when Norwegian
decided to test the U.S. market
by flying to now under-served
Guadeloupe, it demanded no
guarantees. And business boomed.
SIOBUD: Sixty-thousand thousand
passengers to the U.S. in 2015.
And after three months
in 2016, we have 42,000
people flying to the U.S.
SOLMAN: A more than 150 percent
increase in traffic. The U.S.
seemed ripe for discount
global carriers.
Unfortunately, the U.S.
Department of Transportation was
sitting, for two years, on a
Norwegian
request to expand
transatlantic service.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: American
pilots don't want Norwegian to
spread its wings.
SOLMAN: The opposition? Big
carriers and their unions.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Only with
your support will we stop this
scheme that threatens the
future of U.S. airlines
and their employees.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: We are
in a fight for our future.
SOLMAN: This video from the
Airline Pilots Association,
titled "The Wolf is at the
Door,"
was directed against Norwegian.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: We must stop
it now or fight the growth of
pilot-shopping around
the world, at third
world prices.
LINDSTROM: So they were saying
that we were hiring cheap Asian
labor to operate the flights
to and from the U.S.,
which is very incorrect.
SOLMAN: Again,
Norwegian's Lindstrom.
LINDSTROM: We have more
U.S.-based cabin crew than any
other international airline. We
have
about 300 in the U.S. We will be
tripling if not quadrupling in
the next year as we
grow.
SOLMAN: So in your view, this is
just a classic example of
businesses and labor trying to
protect their own turf, or their
own jobs, their own profits?
LINDSTROM: Yes, very much so.
SOLMAN: But with the big
airlines finally making profits
after years of losses, their
opposition is understandable,
says industry expert Levine.
LEVINE: They're not really
interested in seeing anyone else
in. The airlines are afraid that
if customers are given the
choice, they'll buy their
tickets somewhere else from
someone
who will offer them a better
deal. The last I heard, that was
capitalism.
SOLMAN: On the very day we flew,
as it happens, Norwegian's
request was finally ruled upon.
We asked Anders Lindstrom about
it after we got to Guadeloupe.
So yesterday the Department of
Transportation permit you've
been waiting for for two years
now finally came through.
This a big deal?
LINDSTROM: It's a big step. It's
a tentative approval and we're
hoping for the final approval
in just a few months. That will
mean that we can expand into the
U.S. but also use the
same aircraft, expanding from
Europe into other markets such
as India, South Africa,
and South America.
SOLMAN: Meanwhile, what's good
for Norwegian is good for
Guadeloupe. Over-reliant since
the '80s on just one country for
its second biggest industry,
says tourism official Sandra
Venite.
SANDRA VENITE, TOURISM OFFICIAL:
Ninety percent of our tourists
are from mainland France.
This is the people
that are here.
SOLMAN: And so the deal with
Norwegian is low cost, no frills
fares to get the American
tourists back?
VENITE: Yes, exactly. For once,
it benefited us to be French, to
get an airline flying
from the U.S. to the French
Caribbean. How crazy is that?
(LAUGHTER)
SOLMAN: But $69 fares from
New York and watch out!
VENITE: We have capacity to
absorb the demand. We just need
more Americans in Guadeloupe.
We need to go back to where
we were in the '70s.
SOLMAN: And with real airline
competition, Guadeloupe expects
to get there. As for Norwegian s
future, says Michael
E. Levine --
LEVINE: You can do the kind of
thing we're talking about pretty
well as a new, relatively
small niche airline. As you
grow, your labor force becomes
more senior. You're under a
lot of the pressures that make
these other airlines less
efficient. Norwegian's challenge
is to figure out how to grow and
maintain its competitive edge.
That is something that
many airlines have failed
at over the years.
SOLMAN: But it's not something
that Guadeloupe has to worry
about, it seems, not for a
while.
For the PBS "NewsHour" --
come on in, the water's fine!
This is economics correspondent
Paul Solman, reporting from
France, in the Caribbean.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
SREENIVASAN: The tense state of
relations between the U.S. and
Saudi Arabia has been
roiled lately by two issues: a
pending bill in Congress that
would allow lawsuits against
countries found to have been
involved in terrorist attacks on
American soil, and the so-called
"28 pages," parts of a
congressional inquiry after
September 11th that are said to
detail
possible Saudi complicity
in aiding the attacks.
Here to tell us more about both
is chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret Warner.
So, first, let's talk about the
bill, what's in it and what's
the status of it.
MARGARET WARNER, PBS CHIEF
FOREIGN AFFAIRS CORRSPONDENT:
The bill, Hari, would carve
out a special exemption in
what's called the Foreign
Sovereign Immunity Act which
every
country has a similar act and
observe, which is you don't sue
foreign governments, with
a few narrow exceptions. There
was an exception made for
terrorism, but only if you were
on
the state-sponsored terrorism
list which Saudi isn't.
So, these 9/11 victims families
have been trying to push this,
get this bill in a court.
It was rejected by a federal
judge in September saying,
sorry, violates this act. So
that's
sort of what's new here.
It passed unanimously a session
ago in the Senate, but now, it's
run into a buzz saw
of White House opposition. You
have President Obama telling
Charlie Rose if we let this
happen we'll have foreign
citizens suing our government.
All the senior members of the
administration have
come out against this.
So, and then, last -- two weeks
ago, Senator Lindsey Graham, one
of the 22 co-sponsors
and lawyer by training put a
hold on the bill. So, people
thought it was dead. But several
widows came to see him last
week. He was working on
language. And today, I learned
very quietly
he removed his hold on Tuesday.
So, what's happening now is that
the two main co-sponsors,
Republican John Cornyn and
Democrat
Chuck Schumer of New York are
essentially counting heads. They
want to make sure nobody
in their caucus objects, no one
else is going to put a secret
hold on it, and then they ll
ask Mitch Zeller if he will
bring it to the floor.
SREENIVASAN: What role do the 28
pages play in this. They're
discrete but melt together.
WARNER: Yes, they do. And a lot
is sort of a public relations
side. A White House official
said to me that "60 Minutes"
report that appeared, what,
three weeks ago in which the
head of
the congressional investigation,
co-sponsor Bob Graham, and three
of the 9/11 Commission
members, which you know was an
independent, came out and said
there is very -- they didn't
say "evidence" but strong signs
of Saudi complicity in aiding
some of the hijackers -- as we
recall
15 of the 19 were Saudis -- and
in particular the two who were
in San Diego.
You know, mysteriously, they
meet a man who gives them an
apartment, and these are two
guys who don't speak any English
and have had no experience
living in the West. So,
there are a lot of threads in
there. What one White House
official said is that "60
Minutes" report has been like is
that rocket has been a booster
to the Saudi lawsuit bill.
And a top staffer of one of the
senators involved said much the
same. He said, we were kind
of bumping along on the Saudi
lawsuit bill, and suddenly, it's
front and center.
SREENIVASAN: Likely to turn into
a presidential campaign issue?
WARNER: Well, maybe. The thing
is that both Hillary Clinton and
Donald Trump have actually
endorsed the Saudi lawsuit bill
and especially when they were in
New York and on New York
radio and television. So, I
don t -- I think the only thing
that could become political
is if President Obama, who is
supposed to decide on the 28
pages, supposedly by the
end of next month, if he were to
say I m not releasing them, then
it could be an issue.
SREENIVASAN: What's the White
House's reaction been to all
this?
WARNER: Oh, the White House is
apoplectic. And the way one
senior, very senior official
just before the president was
going to Saudi Arabia, he said
this is the last thing we
need. The Saudis are violently
opposed to this. They say they
don t mind releasing
28 pages, but they feel they re
being absolutely, you know, put
in the crosshairs on this bill
and, in fact, at one point, the
foreign minister threatened to
sell all of their assets,
foreign
assets, 750 billion on the
market. He since rescinded that
but still they are very
concerned.
SREENIVASAN: Chief White House
correspondent Margaret Warner,
thanks so much.
WARNER: Thank you.
WOODRUFF: Now, looking back and
looking anew at an artist at the
center of the so-called
"culture wars" of
the 1980s and '90s.
Jeffrey Brown reports
from Los Angeles.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
JEFFREY BROWN, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT: Take another
look: that's the invitation from
two Los Angeles museums,
together presenting a major
retrospective of the work of
Robert
Mapplethorpe.
Mapplethorpe was best known for
his homo-erotic photographs and
explicit sadomasochistic
imagery,
and the political and legal
battles around them.
Even now, we've chosen not to
present his most controversial
work. But the new exhibition,
"Robert Mapplethorpe: The
Perfect Medium", wants us to see
how much more there was to
the artist.
BRITT SALVESEN, LOS ANGELES
COUNTY MUSEUM OF ART: This
gallery gets us to the 1980s
--
BROWN: Britt Salvesen is a
curator at the Los Angeles
County Museum of Art.
SALVESEN: For several years
after the culture wars debate of
the late '80s, early '90s,
it was impossible to see the
work as art because we were
preoccupied with its status as
evidence,
let's say.
BROWN: As part of
that culture war.
SALVESEN: Yes. And that really
forestalled an assessment of his
artwork.
BROWN: Mapplethorpe grew up in a
conservative Irish Catholic
household in Queens, New York,
and in the 1970s became part of
the city's burgeoning gay scene.
He focused from the
beginning on three main
subjects: portraiture, including
artists and celebrities of the
day,
floral still lifes,
and sex and the body.
SALVESEN: Those are very
traditional art historical
subjects, I mean long before
photography.
So the question becomes, how do
you make them your own? And I
think Mapplethorpe does it
through a refinement, a
reduction of extraneous
elements. His sense of
perfection and beauty
is what he applies to those
traditional subjects.
PAUL MARTINEAU, PAUL GETTY
MUSEUM: He has to be in table
position, right in the center
--
BROWN: Paul Martineau curated a
companion exhibition at the
Getty Museum. The two museums
acquired the artist's archives
from the Mapplethorpe Foundation
five years ago.
MARTINEAU: You won't find wilted
flowers in his pictures. He
liked flowers at their most
powerful and most erect. Once
they started wilting, he'd get
rid of them. He really didn't
like flowers. He liked
pictures of flowers.
BROWN: Was he after perfection?
Was he after beauty?
MARTINEAU: He was after
perfection. And beauty was high
up there as well.
BROWN: One regular subject was
Patti Smith, the poet and later
famed rock musician. She
wrote about their youthful times
in her National Book Award
winning memoir, "Just Kids," and
in 2010 told me about her friend
and the ambition they shared.
PATTI SMITH, SINGER/SONGWRITER:
Robert really believed in
himself. Robert was a very
interesting
boy, because he was quite shy,
yet absolutely confident in his
abilities and that he would
someday, you know, achieve
acclaim. He saw his --
BROWN: He knew that,
he felt that?
SMITH: He felt that, absolutely.
BROWN: He would achieve fame,
but for the public at large that
came in 1989 when North
Carolina Senator Jesse Helms
took to the Senate floor to
decry federal funding for a
traveling
exhibition of
Mapplethorpe's work.
SEN. JESSE HELMS (R), NORTH
CAROLINA: I don't even
acknowledge that it's art. I
don't even
acknowledge that the fellow who
did it was an artist. I think he
was a jerk.
BROWN: Bowing to political
pressure, Washington's Corcoran
Museum cancelled the show, and
when
it went on to the Cincinnati
Arts Center, its director was
arrested and charged with
obscenity. He was
later acquitted.
But Mapplethorpe's work would
for years after be seen in this
context. The Los Angeles
exhibitions
contain the controversial work,
accompanied by warning signs of
their explicit content.
Mapplethorpe himself, this is
his last self-portrait, died of
AIDS, at age 42, just before the
cultural
tempest burst.
FENTON BAILEY, FILMMAKER: He
said that his life was the work
of art and the pictures
were secondary. The ultimate
work of art as far as he was
concerned was his life.
BROWN: His life? So, I mean,
he's creating himself as a work
of art? Is that --
RANDY BARBATO, FILMMAKER: And
documenting his life. I think
that's part of why so much
of his art has such impact,
because there's an honesty to
it. There's an intimacy to it.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Everything
was a means to an end to his
career.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: He
was a new type of art.
BROWN: In conjunction with the
joint exhibition, filmmakers
Fenton Bailey and Randy Barbato
released an HBO documentary
called "Look at the Pictures," a
portrait of the man and his
times.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: The whole
point of being an artist is to
learn about yourself, the
photographs I think are less
important than the life that
one s leading.
BAILEY: I think he was playing
something of a game of cat and
mouse with his audience
and critics. I think he knew
that it would provoke, but he
also said he never was intending
to shock people.
BROWN: I mean, do you take that
at face value? How could it not
shock people?
BAILEY: I do and I don't. You
know, exactly. I mean, he knew
that the key here was to
photograph
things, to document things that
people considered outside of the
realm of art. The way he did
it was to elevate them and make
them beautiful. The composition
and the lighting was incredible.
And so, he made what other
people just dismissed as
pornography, he made it art, and
made us
look at it seriously.
BARBATO: It's ironic, we live in
a world now where you can access
the most explicit imagery
at the tip of, you know, at your
fingertips, yet as a society
we're still incredibly
puritanical
about sex. And so his images
still, the explicit ones, I
think people still find it
challenging
and uncomfortable. And I think
that's important. I I think it's
important for people to ask
themselves why.
BROWN: And these many years
later, as "Robert Mapplethorpe:
The Perfect Medium" shows,
there's
also much to look at anew.
From Los Angeles, I m Jeffrey
Brown for "The PBS NewsHour".
(END VIDEOTAPE)
SREENIVASAN: Finally, another
installment in our brief but
spectacular series. Tonight,
we hear from 91-year-old Flossie
Lewis. A former English teacher,
she now lives at the
Piedmont Gardens Senior Living
Community in the Bay Area. Lewis
keeps busy by writing
fiction and offers us insight on
what it feels like to grow old.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
FLOSSIE LEWIS, 91-YEAR-OLD:
Getting old is a state of mind.
Now, I m 91. I m badly
crippled, but I still think
I m 15. Will this go viral?
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: We hope so.
LEWIS: There are several ways I
keep myself stimulated. By
dragging myself to Piedmont
Avenue on my walker or in my
wheelchair, and you should see
me use my wheelchair.
I write light verse for "The
Crest" which is our newspaper,
and every month you can
find a sly little bit of
verse from Flossie Lewis.
The other way I keep being
stimulated is just watching
politics. And if that isn't
enough
to drive you crazy, I don't know
what is. You do struggle to keep
yourself neat and
clean and fashionable.
And there is always the
possibility that romance comes
your way. Just liking someone is
a treat
because part of being old is to
get cranky. There is indigestion
and your teeth fall out
and suddenly you need hearing
aides and you feel increasingly
unattractive, and then somebody
says, "How nice you look today,
Mrs. Lewis! Or, you're a real
kick, Flossie!"
And you feel good about
yourself. You pick yourself up
and you say, "I m going to get
through it. I m going to get
through it because I have a
reason to get through it."
Really growing old is when you
discover that you haven't a
reason to get through it
anymore,
and that you would like to go to
sleep with a certain amount of
dignity. Accepting the
fact the body is going to go but
the personality doesn't have to
go, and that thing which is
the hardest to admit is that
character doesn't have to go.
I m Flossie Lewis. This is my
brief but spectacular take on
growing old.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: What a charmer. I
want to be Flossie Lewis.
SREENIVASAN: If Washington
politics is the key to
longevity, through this election
year,
you should get another
a few years to live --
WOODRUFF: I know.
You can watch our brief and
spectacular videos online at
PBS.org/newshour/brief.
And recapping the day s major
stories, Donald Trump began
working to build his fall
presidential
campaign and win over Republican
leaders. But House Speaker Paul
Ryan says he is not
ready to support Trump.
A raging wildlife forced new
evacuations near Fort McMurray,
Alberta, in the heart of
Canada's
oil sands country.
And an airstrike in northwest
Syria killed at least 28 people
in a crowded refugee camp
near the Turkish border. It was
unclear who launched the strike.
On "The NewsHour" online right
now, the largest stash of
elephant tusks and rhino horns
ever
assembled in one place was
burned over the weekend in
Kenya. That is 100 tons,
destroyed
in an effort to eliminate the
prized ivory from the black
market. You can find a photo
essay from the burn on our
homepage. All that and more is
on our website,
PBS.org/newshour.
SREENIVASAN: Tune in later
tonight on Charlie Rose, Daveed
Diggs, the actor who plays both
Thomas Jefferson and the Marquis
de Lafayette in the
Tony-nominated musical,
"Hamilton."
And that's "The NewsHour" for
tonight. I m Hari Sreenivasan
WOODRUFF: And I m Judy Woodruff.
Join us online, and again here
tomorrow evening with Mark
Shields and David Brooks. For
all
of us at "The PBS NewsHour",
thank you and good night.